# Welcome to Bryan Burnett's GitHub page created for my Capstone project at Southern New Hampshire University.  
# Self Assessment:

During my time at SNHU, I have learned several important skills in the field of computer science that I will carry with me into my future career. Though I began with zero coding experience, I have learned SQL, C++, Python, Java, and some R. These languages were learned both through classes at SNHU and personal learning outside of SNHU. SNHU introduced me to new languages, concepts, and tactics that have helped me to understand computer science concepts. Some of the most important, and most enjoyable, topics I learned about were SQL (database queries), Python algorithms, code security, and data structures. These areas are key to a successful career in computer science or data science because they are critical to writing industry-standard code, and more importantly understanding it.

# Collaborating in Team Environments:
Throughout my education in computer science, I have been fortunate to participate in solo and team collaboration projects. These introduced me to new learning and programming environments. I learned how to utilize GitHub to collaborate with a team to manage our code base while working on similar portions of the code. We as a team were able to work in an Agile environment, like how actual development teams work, and reported to the scrum master for issues and updates. Team building and collaboration was prevalent in every class with the discussion posts. Just having that interaction was beneficial to learn from peers. 

# Communicating to Stakeholders:
Aside from communication with the team members, I also learned about communication with stakeholders and/or customers. I had learned about the importance and role of a project manager and the use of a Unified Modeling Language or UML. A UML is essentially having a plan on paper. Typically, the project manager will be the contact person, and work as the go between for the developers and the stakeholders to ensure that the stakeholder’s scope for the project is met. The importance for all parties to be clear about the project and expectations is nearly immeasurable. From the developers stand-point this is where the UML usage begins. Before the project starts developers should form a UML of the system that covers the scope provided by the stakeholders. This is the stage where wants and needs are discussed, factoring in time and budget. When the plan is complete, and manageable, the stakeholders can get a glimpse into the system they want before any actual coding begins, as well as then could provide feedback. Doing this ensures all parties are involved in the process of developing a system to build the best possible final product.

# Data Structures and Algorithms:
Through my coursework at SNHU, I have learned several different concepts and strategies for writing code. Using the knowledge gained from multiple courses, I’ve learned the importance of structuring applications properly, to use efficient storage methods, to use efficient algorithms, and to make the algorithms secure to reduce memory overhead, as well as undesired outcome of the applications. I have also learned about vectors, hash tables, binary search trees, and when it is most appropriate to utilize each one. Understanding the design and functionality of various data structures allows me to pick and choose which one(s) I feel are best suited to my applications scope and allows me to build my code to run more efficiently.

# Software Engineering and Databases:
While at SNHU, I have been introduced to both SQL and Mongo DB database structures. This opportunity has allowed me to become familiar with both object-oriented and relational database designs and how to use them. I have learned how to create CRUD modules (create, read, update, delete) that allow me to interact with my databases, how to perform queries in each database, and more advanced concepts like aggregation pipelines, and advanced queries. These concepts are important because databases are a critical part of data science. The probability that I will encounter databases in the future is very high. 

# Security:
Working in healthcare for the past couple of decades, security has always been a priority in my work. Security is a critical piece in the development of any application. During my coursework at SNHU, I was introduced to security vulnerabilities related to multiple aspects of code, endless loops, and data overflows. I learned how deficits in security and security flaws can vary from crashing applications to executing arbitrary code. This knowledge has shown me that when designing an application that I should always consider ways to improve security and limit inputs from the user while still maintaining the full functionality of the program.

# Summary:
I chose to enhance two projects. Both projects encompassed software design, data structures and algorithms, as well as databases. For my first project, I focused on the software design, structures and algorithms elements. The first project was an ATM Python project from IT 140: Intro to Scripting. This project was simple utilizing only three functions. I enhanced the project by adding new functionality, security, and improved upon the code to make it more efficient.

The second project focused on the databases element. This project was demonstrating a series of queries to manage a database from my DAD 220: Intro to SQL course. In this project I created a database with tables, updated and removed data from them. I enhanced the project by adding new functionality and utilized more advanced SQL methods to query the database. Comments were updated to describe what the code was to do as well. 

I chose these artifacts to collectively demonstrate my abilities to create two clean, comprehensive, functional, and well commented artifacts. I was able to improve the readability, functionality, security, and real-world application of each artifact to demonstrate my skills. I accomplished this by modifying the Python application for greater functionality, efficiency, that also utilized an onboard data repository to save space, adding security through improved algorithms, secure logins with pass PINs and preventative measures against overflows, and endless loops. The advanced SQL queries and management of data demonstrate an ongoing learning of the functionality and techniques SQL offers. These enhancements demonstrate the knowledge I have gained throughout my time as a computer science student and showcase my ability to create functional programs from existing projects, as well as recreating projects in a different SQL environment.


# The Chosen Artifacts: 
ATM Python project from IT 140: Intro to Scripting

oh_no_the_sql from DAD 220: Intro to SQL

# Code Review:
Can be found at Github or a faster way to view on YouTube: 

https://youtu.be/W2IW0AfGMaY



# Enhancement One: Software Design and Engineering
The project has improved vastly, through feedback, and trial and error of the artifact code, I have built a better program. Employ strategies for building collaborative environments that enable diverse audiences to support organizational decision making in the field of computer science. This was achieved in my e-Portfolio, ensuring that I have cleaned up the code by eliminating whitespace and making comments much more meaningful by describing their intent, and what the section of code is to do. I have followed coding standards in doing so and eliminated some of the code redundancies. I have improved the algorithms and data structures, by creating safety loops and break points to eliminate buffer overflows. I have designed the system to be separate but together for a more secure database protocol. Which also saved some space on the program itself, allowing for more efficiency. The design has been engineered to be robust, secure, and efficient. Previously, the artifact had no security in place, and was only able to perform three functions. The new enhancements I created in Python present live data and allow for improved interactivity and functionality. The lack of security or functionality of the original artifact necessitated security measures be put into place. Develop a security mindset that anticipates adversarial exploits in software architecture and designs to expose potential vulnerabilities, mitigate design flaws, and ensure privacy and enhanced security of data and resources. This will be accomplished by creating and using security redundancies and standards to maintain industry security and coding standards. In essence to ensure safe, secure code. This was achieved in my artifact by highlighting the problem and insecurity of the original atm program, noting several vulnerabilities and design flaws with the algorithm, citing lack of privacy and lack of security. To ensure privacy and security, I coded the new algorithm to be secure, implementing a login unique to each user as well as a unique PIN code for another layer of security. The e-Portfolio updates for the ATM.py program in terms of software design/engineering are that a new design has been partially implemented and is in process of being engineered to efficiently resolve the issues of security, and functionality. The ATM program now has layers of security in place and has been engineered to improve the data structure and efficiency of the algorithms.  
The second artifact, the oh_no_the_sql file has been modified, utilizing new methods to create, remove and modify data, as well as create queries that display the necessary data. 


# Enhancement Two: Algorithms and Data Structure
Design, develop, and deliver professional-quality oral, written, and visual communications that are coherent, technically sound, and appropriately adapted to specific audiences and contexts. This was achieved in the atm program by illustrating the problem and ineffectiveness with the algorithm in place, and then creating a solution to resolve security flaws and limitations in functionality. Then creating a flowchart to visualize the new approach and expansions of security and functionality of the ATM project. Prior to this exploration, no attempt was made at securing the data, nor was user expansion an option. 
Design and evaluate computing solutions that solve a given problem using algorithmic principles and computer science practices and standards appropriate to its solution, while managing the trade-offs involved in design choices. I achieved this in the ATM program by highlighting the problem and ineffectiveness with the algorithm, and then coding the new algorithms to be secure, decrease time and increase speed. All while expanding functionality of the ATM program. The comparison and resulting output from the data processed by the new algorithm presents the fictitious bank with clean, usable data to make financial transactions easier and more secure via their ATM. In the past, the algorithm limited the correct and expedient output of data, while the data was easily interpretable by the bank IS team, it was too simple and did not provide much functionality or security. The new program enhancements show no trade-offs in the design choices, and resolve the issues with functionality, expansion of options and security.
The ATM.py program now has algorithms that provide secure loops at each process. Each of the data structures are set to work in tandem to accomplish the requested task, without any buffer overflows. The data structure created the need to use if/else loops and try/except loops within the main algorithm to accomplish the functionality and security that was in dire need of revision. This required the program to call upon the requested account, verified by a PIN, from a database. 


# Enhancement Three: Databases
To save space on a very tired laptop, the database is on board as a separate file attached to the ATM.py program. It can be updated only while in that file, although it works as part of the ATM program as it calls the appropriate account number, PIN, and pulls the requested information during the session. The database is simple and elegant. It holds only pertinent information related to the ATM program.  
For the second artifact, the oh_no_the_sql file, I have recreated it in MySQL, utilized various methods of modifying, removing, and creating data within the file. I have created queries that display only the needed information for what I need to see from the data. These queries are documented with the query input and output via screenshot in a Word file. I have updated the comments in the oh_no_the_sql file to better reflect what is being accomplished from the queries. No more of the “#check work” comments.  
The specific skillset required for this achievement are to Demonstrate an ability to use well-founded and innovative techniques, skills, and tools in computing practices for the purpose of implementing computer solutions that deliver value and accomplish industry-specific goals. This will be accomplished by creating and using appropriate loops and algorithms to achieve the desired outcome of the project, while maintaining industry security and coding standards. I will achieve this in my portfolio in the oh_shno_the_sql-final.txt file by seeking out and utilizing well-founded, and innovative advanced techniques unique to SQL. Using SQL’s tools in computing practices accomplished the goal of sorting and retrieving data by utilizing industry-specific skills to achieve industry-specific goals. By utilizing the standards of security and coding, I searched and parsed only what was vital to the project. None of the information was leaked or corrupted because of the security practices in place. 


The screenshots of this can be found here: 

https://snhu-my.sharepoint.com/:w:/r/personal/bryan_burnett1_snhu_edu/Documents/CS499_FinalEnhancements.docx?d=w200c3fcdf1f04a89bf211107e8043212&csf=1&web=1&e=gbm0m6


# More information on my enhancements, including an initial code review,  can be found at my Web Page.
Please come see my web page: https://burntab78.github.io/Bryan.Burnett.github.io/
